# Univariate and interaction assessment among risk factors on COVID-19 during pre-vaccination period in USA: a negative binomial regression analysis

Understanding the univariate and multivariate associations of risk factors is important in Epidemiology studies in order to respond to a pandemic, provide information on the effectiveness of alternative response plans, and further to conduct real-world impact assessments. In this study, we used COVID-19 data as a case study and demonstrated the potential of a new modeling approach of utilizing quartile clustering in conjunction with negative binomial regression in order to better understand how specific interactions among comorbidities, demographic factors, and socioeconomic risk factors individually affect the infection and fatality rates.

Our study highlights that the relationship between some sociodemographic factors with infection/fatality rates is not straightforward and can be influenced by the presence or combination of other variables. This emphasizes that exploring and understanding interaction effects can provide valuable insights into the complexity of relationships within data. It also underscores the limitations of univariate models that only consider one variable at a time, as they may overlook these intricate relationships. Notably, many studies outside the USA have also explored an interaction effect of significant risk factors of the demographic variables that could also be controlling variables that determine the overall casualties caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. This study emphasizes the importance of using interaction assessments of the risk factors in order to determine whether selected sub-populations defined by the intersection of specific risk factors are more vulnerable to COVID-19 infection and fatality based on county-wise data in the USA. 

Our analysis showed that the bivariate interaction of low education along with other factors such as elderly population, Hispanic, and non-Hispanic Black (NHB) population are more associated with increased infection, while the interaction effects of population density with the elderly population, male population with poverty, and Hispanic population with low education were associated with increased fatality. Furthermore, the univariate model did not capture the impact of obesity on infections, but through interaction analysis, a positive influence emerged when considering the interplay between obesity and the elderly population. Similarly, the univariate models failed to capture the impact of less education and the Hispanic population on infections, as well as the influence of poverty on fatality. Employing interaction models unveiled these significant associations, emphasizing the added insights gained by considering the interplay between variables.

# Coding language and library
We used the R language (version 4.2.0) for the data analysis, along with the following libraries: GGally, dplyr,plyr, ggplot2, tidyr, tibble, purrr,sp, moments, MASS, foreign, car, readxl, FSA, ggpubr, svglite, formattable, VGAM, cluster, Metrics. The code is available unde covid_manuscript.RMD and data available in data folder.



